Add a coding guidelines document to the public repository (#13095)
PowerDNS/pdns: CODING_GUIDELINES.md

We describe the use of smart pointers, containers and other wrappers for that purpose below, but first a few words of caution.
Resources stored in a object are only tied to this object if the constructor finished properly.
If an exception is raised in the constructor body, the object is not created and therefore the destructor will not get called.
This means that if the object has non-object members holding resources, like naked file descriptors or naked pointers, they need to be explicitly released before raising the exception, otherwise they are lost.

```C++
class BadFileDescriptorWrapper
{
  BadFileDescriptorWrapper()
  {
    d_fd = open(...);
    if (something) {
      throw std::runtime_error(...);
    }
    ...
  }
  ~BadFileDescriptorWrapper()
  {
    if (d_fd > 0) {
      close(d_fd);
      d_fd = -1;
    }
  }
  int getHandle() const
  {
    return d_fd;
  }
private:
  int d_fd{-1}; 
};
```

The use of smart pointers can be a solution to most resources leakage, but otherwise the only way is to be careful about exceptions in constructors:

```C++

> BadFileDescriptorWrapper()

Author: Fixed by Fred :)

  }
  ...
}
```

## Smart pointers

There is almost no good reason not to use a smart pointer when doing dynamic memory allocation.
Smart pointers will keep track of whether the dynamically allocated object is still used, and destroy it when the last user goes away.

Using naked pointers quickly results in security issues, ranging from memory leaks to arbitrary code execution.
Examples of such issues can be found in the following PowerDNS security advisories:

* [2017-07: Memory leak in DNSSEC parsing](https://docs.powerdns.com/recursor/security-advisories/powerdns-advisory-2017-07.html)
* [2018-04: Crafted answer can cause a denial of service](https://docs.powerdns.com/recursor/security-advisories/powerdns-advisory-2018-04.html)

Most allocations should be wrapped in a `std::unique_ptr`, using `make_unique`.
There can only be one owner at a given time, as opposed to shared pointers, but the ownership can be passed along using `std::move()` if needed.

If the dynamically allocated object needs to be referenced in several places, the use of a `std::shared_ptr` is advised instead, via `std::make_shared`.

The use of the `make_*` methods has three advantages:

> * they result in a single allocation for `shared_ptr`s, instead of two otherwise ;

Reviewer: I see ` ;` after a lot of list items, but not after all of them. Is this some leftover from the conversion from another format? Whatever we do, we should do it consistently.

Author: Will do!

* do not mix array allocations (`new[]`) with a non-array `delete` (vs `delete[]`).

## Pointer arithmetic

It is very common to use pointer arithmetic to calculate a position in a buffer, or to test whether a given offset is outside of a given buffer.
Unfortunately it is quite easy to trigger undefined behaviour when doing so, as the C++ standard does not allow pointer arithmetic pointing inside an object, except for arrays where it is also permitted to point one element past the end.
Still that undefined behaviour is mostly harmless, but it might lead to real issue on some platforms.

One such example occurred in dnsdist: [2017-01: Crafted backend responses can cause a denial of service](https://dnsdist.org/security-advisories/powerdns-advisory-for-dnsdist-2017-01.html)

In that case, a pointer was set to the start of a buffer plus a given length, to see whether the result would go past another pointer that was set to the end of the buffer.
Unfortunately, if the start of the buffer is at a very high virtual address, the result of the addition might overflow and wrap around, causing the check to become true and leading to either a crash or the reading of unrelated memory.

> While very unlikely on a 64 bits platform, it could happen on 16 or 32 bits platform.

Author: Will do!

The use of a container and its corresponding `at()` operator would have prevented an out-of-bounds read since calling `at()` on an invalid offset results in an exception being raised.
The cost of using `at()` is negligible for most use cases, and can be avoided by using the `[]` operator in the rare case when the cost cannot be afforded.
Note that several Linux distributions now build with `-Wp,-D_GLIBCXX_ASSERTIONS` enabled by default, which turns on cheap range checks for C++ arrays, vectors, and strings anyway.

Regarding performance, it is advised to `reserve()` the needed size in advance when a rough estimate is known to avoid reallocations and copies.
Resizing in advance is not advised, though, as it makes it harder to know what is exactly in the container in case of early returns or exceptions.

In C++11, move operators make it possible to cheaply get the contents of a container into a different variable if needed.

The need to pass a subset of a container without copying it often leads to passing a pointer to an array of chars along with a size.

> Introduced in C++14 but already available in PowerDNS via boost (see views.hh), views provides a nice way to borrow the content of a container to pass it to a function, without any copy or dynamic memory allocation.

Author: Good catch! We already got rid of `views.hh` in https://github.com/PowerDNS/pdns/pull/10336 and I'm updating this line.

* denial of service via hash table flooding (in a map, all entries that hash to the same value are often placed into a linked-list, making it possible to cause a linear scan of entries by making all of them hash to that same value).

The first issue can be prevented by comparing the entries and not just the value they hash to.
The second one can be used by using some sort of secret when computing the hash so that the result cannot be guessed by the attacker.
That can be achieved by using an unpredictable seed for certain hash algorithms, or a secret for some other like `SipHash`.

# Readability tips

Some of these tips are actually enforced by `clang-tidy` nowadays, but it is still useful to keep them in mind.

## auto

C++11 introduced automatic type deduction, using the `auto` keyword.
In addition to saving the typing of a few more letters, using automatic type deduction prevents nasty surprises if the variable is initialized from another one, or from a function, and the other type is changed to a different one.
The code might still compile while now involving a copy or worse.

> ## Boolean expressions

Author: The section is now gone, I moved the content earlier but forgot to remove the section altogether.

* compare to `nullptr` for the same reason.

## Initialization

Use braced initialization for members as often as possible:

* it does forbid narrowing conversions
* and avoids C++'s "[most vexing parse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Most_vexing_parse)" which is to declare a function instead of calling the default constructor:

```c++
Object a(); // declares a function named a that returns an object
```

## nullptr

When representing a pointer, using `nullptr` makes it immediately obvious that we are dealing with a pointer, as opposed to the use of `0`.
It also cannot be silently taken as an integer, which can happens with `0` but also with `NULL`.

## const-ness

* Mark parameters and variables that should not be modified as `const`.
  This is especially important for references and pointers that comes from outside the function, but it also makes sense to do it for local variables or parameters passed by value because it might help detect a logic error later.
* Mark const methods as such (and make them thread-safe)
* Prefer using `at()` on containers so that no insertion can take place by mistake, and to get bounds checking.

## static

> Functions that are only used inside a single file should be marked as `static`, so that:

Reviewer: I think we prefer `namespace { ... }` these days?

Author: I'll mention both options since I don't really have an opinion on whether one is better than the other, but perhaps you or Fred do?

Reviewer: I have a small preference for `namespace { ... }`

Reviewer 2: Same here.

Author: Alright!

try {
}
catch (const std::exception& e) {
  std::cerr << e.what() <<endl;
}
```

Not using a reference would result in the exception object being sliced, meaning that a custom exception derived from `std::exception` would not see its overriding `what()` method called but the one from the base class instead.

## Casts

C-style casts should be avoided, as the compiler does almost no check on the validity of the operation.
They are also very hard to spot in a code.
C++-style casts can easily be spotted in a code, which makes it easy to review them.

* `const_cast` can be used to remove the const qualifier on a variable.
  It's usually a bad sign, but sometimes it is needed to call a function that will not modify the variable but lacks the const qualifier, for example.
* `dynamic_cast` can be used to cast a pointer to a derived class or to a base class, while checking that the operation is valid.
  If the casted object is not valid for the intended type, a nullptr value will be returned (or a bad_cast exception for references) so the result of the operation should be checked!
  Note that the RTTI check needed to verify that the casted object is valid has a non-negligible CPU cost.

>   Not checking the return value might lead to remote denial of service by nullptr dereference, as happened with the issue described in this advisory: https://docs.powerdns.com/recursor/security-advisories/powerdns-advisory-2017-08.html

Reviewer: forgot this one in my earlier pushes:

```suggestion
  Not checking the return value might lead to remote denial of service by nullptr dereference, as happened with the issue described in this advisory: [2017-08: Crafted CNAME answer can cause a denial of service](https://docs.powerdns.com/recursor/security-advisories/powerdns-advisory-2017-08.html)
```

Author: Applied!

Since stack-allocated objects, like local variables in a function, are automatically destroyed when a function exits, be it by reaching the last line, calling return or throwing an exception, it makes it possible to ensure that resources are always properly destroyed by wrapping them in an object.

We describe the use of smart pointers, containers and other wrappers for that purpose below, but first a few words of caution.
Resources stored in a object are only tied to this object if the constructor executes fully and completes properly.
If an exception is raised in the constructor's body, the object is not created and therefore the destructor will not be called.
This means that if the object has non-object members holding resources, like raw file descriptors or raw C-style pointers, they need to be explicitly released before raising the exception, otherwise they are lost or leaked.

```C++
class BadFileDescriptorWrapper
{
  BadFileDescriptorWrapper()
  {
    d_fd = open(...);
    if (something) {

>       throw std::runtime_error(...);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      throw std::runtime_error(...);  // WRONG, DO NOT DO THIS
```

Author: Applied!

* Memory allocations are handled by the container itself ;
* It prevents a disconnect between the actual size and the variable tracking that size ;
* It provides safe (and fast) operations like comparisons, iterators, etc..

One issue that could have been prevented by the use of a container can be found in the following advisory: [2018-09: Crafted query can cause a denial of service](https://docs.powerdns.com/recursor/security-advisories/powerdns-advisory-2018-09.html)

The use of a container and its corresponding `at()` operator would have prevented an out-of-bounds read since calling `at()` on an invalid offset results in an exception being raised.
The cost of using `at()` is negligible for most use cases, and can be avoided by using the `[]` operator in the rare case when the cost cannot be afforded.
Note that several Linux distributions now build with `-Wp,-D_GLIBCXX_ASSERTIONS` enabled by default, which turns on cheap range checks for C++ arrays, vectors, and strings.

Regarding performance, it is advised to `reserve()` the needed size in advance when a rough estimate is known to avoid reallocations and copies.

> Resizing in advance is not advised, though, as it makes it harder to exactly know what is in the container in case of early returns or exceptions.

Reviewer 3: this conflicts with the sentence before, at least without further qualification

Reviewer 2: It does no conflict, reserving and resizing are two different operations.

Reviewer 3: Yeah I read it three times and only now I see the difference :)

Author: Done!

This inevitably leads to the question of how to synchronise data accesses between threads.
Most objects, like containers, cannot be accessed from more than one thread at once.
Even `const` methods on containers might not be thread-safe.
For example getting the `size()` of a container might not be thread-safe if a different thread might be writing to the container.
Some functions might also not be thread-safe, for example if they have a static non-const variable.

We currently use three solutions, depending on the use-case.
The first one is used when we only need to share some kind of counter or gauge, and involves the use of `std::atomic` which allows atomic operations to be performed from different threads without locking. More on that later.
The second one is the "share nothing" approach, where each thread has its own data (using `thread_local`, for example), avoiding the need for data synchronization.
When a thread needs to communicate with another one, it might use a `pdns::channel` to pass a pointer to that second thread.
That works quite well but sometimes sharing data is much more efficient than the alternative.

> For these cases, we use the classic locking approach, using either a simple mutex or read-write lock, depending on the use case.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For other cases, we use the classic locking approach, using either a simple mutex or read-write lock, depending on the use case.
```

?

at least it doesn't feel consistent with the "three solutions" lead in

Author: I'll rewrite it.

They are also used in our caches.
An important caveat that developers need to be aware of regarding hashes are that the probability of a collision is often a lot higher than expected.
This is well-known as the birthday paradox, the fact that the probability of having two entries colliding is a lot higher than the probability of finding a collision for a specific entry.
This means that it is important to verify that the entries are actually identical, and just not that they hash to the same value.

This is especially important when hashing attacker-controlled values, as they can be specially crafted to trigger collisions to cause:

* Cache pollution (see [2018-06: Packet cache pollution via crafted query](https://docs.powerdns.com/recursor/security-advisories/powerdns-advisory-2018-06.html)) ;
* Denial of service via hash table flooding (in a map, all entries that hash to the same value are often placed into a linked-list, making it possible to cause a linear scan of entries by making all of them hash to that same value).

The first issue can be prevented by comparing the entries and not just the value they hash to.

> The second one can be used by using some sort of secret when computing the hash so that the result cannot be guessed by the attacker.

Reviewer 3: used? -> avoided?

That can be achieved by using an unpredictable seed for certain hash algorithms, or a secret for some other like `SipHash`.

# Readability Tips

Some of these tips are actually enforced by `clang-tidy` nowadays, but it is still useful to keep them in mind.

## `auto`

C++11 introduced automatic type deduction, using the `auto` keyword.
Using automatic type deduction prevents nasty surprises if the variable is initialized from another one, or from a function, and the other type is changed to a different one.

> The code might still compile while now involving a copy or worse.

Reviewer 3: could be more explicit, ex:
```suggestion
Without `auto`, code might still compile but trigger a copy or worse.
```

> ## Boolean Expressions

Reviewer 3: missing section text?

Using automatic type deduction prevents nasty surprises if the variable is initialized from another one, or from a function, and the other type is changed to a different one.
The code might still compile while now involving a copy or worse.

## Explicit Comparisons

* Compare numerical values with `== 0` or `!= 0` explicitly ;
* Compare to `false` explicitly, which is easier to read ;
* Compare to `nullptr` for the same reason.

## Initialization

Use braced initialization for members as often as possible:

* It does forbid narrowing conversions :
* It avoids C++'s "[most vexing parse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Most_vexing_parse)" which is to declare a function instead of calling the default constructor:

```c++
Object a(); // declares a function named a that returns an object
```

## `nullptr`

When representing a pointer, using `nullptr` makes it immediately obvious that we are dealing with a pointer, as opposed to the use of `0`.
It also cannot be silently taken as an integer, which can happens with `0` but also with `NULL`.

## `const`-ness

* Mark parameters and variables that should not be modified as `const`.

>   This is especially important for references and pointers that comes from outside the function, but it also makes sense to do it for local variables or parameters passed by value because it might help detect a logic error later ;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This is especially important for references and pointers that come from outside the function, but it also makes sense to do it for local variables or parameters passed by value because it might help detect a logic error later ;
```

* Mark `const` methods as such (and make them thread-safe) ;
* Prefer using `at()` on containers so that no insertion can take place by mistake, and to get bounds checking.

## Unnamed Namespace

Functions that are only used inside a single file should be put into an unnamed namespace, so that:

* The compiler knows that these functions will not be called from a different compilation unit and thus that no symbol needs to be generated, making it more likely for the function to be inlined ;
* The reader knows that this function is only used there and can be altered without causing an issue somewhere else.

```c++
namespace {

bool thisFunctionIsOnlyUsableFromThisTranslationUnit()
{
}

}
```

These functions used to be marked `static` in the past, so you might still encounter this form in the code base instead: 

```c++
static bool thisOneAsWell()
{
}
```

but the unnamed namespace form is now preferred.

For the same reason, global variables that are only accessed from a single file should be marked static as well.

## Variables

Try to declare variables in the innermost scope possible and avoid uninitialized variables as much as possible.

> Declare and initialize them when the values needed to initialize them are available.

Reviewer 3: double `them` in this sentence

## Exceptions

Should be reserved for unexpected events (corrupted data, timeouts, ...) and should not be triggered in normal processing.

Do not be afraid of using them, though, as the cost of an exception that is not thrown is usually very small, thanks to the zero-cost exception model.

> It might still force the compiler to refrain from some optimizations, so it might make sense to avoid them in some very performance-sensitive, narrow code paths.

Reviewer 3: this section could use more examples or a definite list of what is considered an unexpected event. I'd think for people used to do network programming, read timeouts wouldn't be unexpected, f.e.

Author: I'll rewrite that paragraph :+1:

### Custom Exceptions

Exceptions defined by the standards should be used whenever possible, as they already cover a lot of use cases.

> If custom exceptions are necessary, to be able to catch them explicitly, they should still derive from `std::exception`, directly or indirectly, so that they can still be caught in a more generic way to prevent the program from terminating.

Reviewer 3: two `still` in this sentence, neither of which might really add sth

For example, the main connection handling function of a server can catch `std::exception` and just terminate the current connection if an uncaught exception bubbles up.

### Catching Exceptions

Catching exceptions should always be done by `const`-reference:

```c+++
try {
}
catch (const std::exception& e) {
  std::cerr << e.what() <<endl;
}
```

Not using a reference would result in the exception object being sliced, meaning that a custom exception derived from `std::exception` would not see its overriding `what()` method called but the one from the base class instead.

## Casts

> C-style casts should be avoided, as the compiler does almost no check on the validity of the operation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
C-style casts should be avoided, as the compiler does almost no checking on the validity of the operation.
```

Resources stored in a object are only tied to this object if the constructor executes fully and completes properly.
If an exception is raised in the constructor's body, the object is not created and therefore the destructor will not be called.
This means that if the object has non-object members holding resources, like raw file descriptors or raw C-style pointers, they need to be explicitly released before raising the exception, otherwise they are lost or leaked.

```C++
class BadFileDescriptorWrapper
{
  BadFileDescriptorWrapper()
  {
    d_fd = open(...);
    if (something) {
      throw std::runtime_error(...); // WRONG, DO NOT DO THIS!
    }
    ...
  }

  ~BadFileDescriptorWrapper()
  {
    if (d_fd > 0) {
      close(d_fd);
      d_fd = -1;
    }
  }

  int getHandle() const
  {
    return d_fd;
  }

private:
  int d_fd{-1};
};
```

The use of smart pointers can be a solution to most resource leakage problems, but otherwise the only way is to be careful about exceptions in constructors:

```C++
GoodFileDescriptorWrapper()
{
  d_fd = open(...);
  if (something) {

>     close(d_fd);
>     throw std::runtime_error(...);

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    close(d_fd);
    d_fd = -1;
    throw std::runtime_error(...);
```

Note that several Linux distributions now build with `-Wp,-D_GLIBCXX_ASSERTIONS` enabled by default, which turns on cheap range checks for C++ arrays, vectors, and strings.

Regarding performance, it is advised to [`reserve()`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector/reserve) the needed size in advance when a rough estimate is known to avoid reallocations and copies. It usually triggers the allocation of enough memory to hold the requested number of items but does not increase the size of the container as reported by `size()`.
Calling [`resize()`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector/resize) in advance is not advised, though, as it makes it harder to exactly know what is in the container in case of early returns or exceptions.

In C++11, move operators make it possible to cheaply get the contents of a container into a different variable if needed.

The need to pass a subset of a container without copying it often leads to passing a pointer to an array of chars along with a size.
Introduced in C++14, `views` provide a nice way to borrow the content of a container to pass it to a function, without any copying or dynamic memory allocation.

> The basic `string_view` class provides that feature for a container of chars, but the same feature exists for other types, like `uint8_t`.

Author: It is confusing indeed, I'll remove it.

This is well-known as the birthday paradox, the fact that the probability of having two entries colliding is a lot higher than the probability of finding a collision for a specific entry.
This means that it is important to verify that the entries are actually identical, and just not that they hash to the same value.

This is especially important when hashing attacker-controlled values, as they can be specially crafted to trigger collisions to cause:

* Cache pollution (see [2018-06: Packet cache pollution via crafted query](https://docs.powerdns.com/recursor/security-advisories/powerdns-advisory-2018-06.html)) ;
* Denial of service via hash table flooding (in a map, all entries that hash to the same value are often placed into a linked-list, making it possible to cause a linear scan of entries by making all of them hash to that same value).

The first issue can be prevented by comparing the entries and not just the value they hash to.
The second one can be avoided by using some sort of secret when computing the hash so that the result cannot be guessed by the attacker.

> That can be achieved by using an unpredictable seed for certain hash algorithms, or a secret for some other like `SipHash`.

Reviewer 5: Maybe add a reference link for `SipHash`

  This is especially important for references and pointers that come from outside the function, but it also makes sense to do it for local variables or parameters passed by value because it might help detect a logic error later ;
* Mark `const` methods as such (and make them thread-safe) ;
* Prefer using `at()` on containers so that no insertion can take place by mistake, and to get bounds checking.

## Unnamed Namespace

Functions that are only used inside a single file should be put into an unnamed namespace, so that:

* The compiler knows that these functions will not be called from a different compilation unit and thus that no symbol needs to be generated, making it more likely for the function to be inlined ;
* The reader knows that this function is only used there and can be altered without causing an issue somewhere else.

```c++
namespace {

bool thisFunctionIsOnlyUsableFromThisTranslationUnit()
{
}

}
```

These functions used to be marked `static` in the past, so you might still encounter this form in the code base instead: 

```c++
static bool thisOneAsWell()
{
}
```

but the unnamed namespace form is now preferred.

> For the same reason, global variables that are only accessed from a single file should be marked static as well.

Reviewer 4: Or be put in a unnamed namespace?

### Catching Exceptions

Catching exceptions should always be done by `const`-reference:

```c+++
try {
}
catch (const std::exception& e) {
  std::cerr << e.what() <<endl;
}
```

Not using a reference would result in the exception object being sliced, meaning that a custom exception derived from `std::exception` would not see its overriding `what()` method called but the one from the base class instead.

## Casts

C-style casts should be avoided, as the compiler does almost no checking on the validity of the operation.
They are also very hard to spot in a code.
C++-style casts can easily be spotted in a code, which makes it easy to review them.

* `const_cast` can be used to remove the `const` qualifier on a variable.
  It's usually a bad sign, but is sometimes needed to call a function that will not modify the variable but lacks the `const` qualifier ;
* `dynamic_cast` can be used to cast a pointer to a derived class or to a base class, while checking that the operation is valid.
  If the cast object is not valid for the intended type, a `nullptr` value will be returned (or a `bad_cast` exception for references) so the result of the operation should be checked!

>   Note that the RTTI check needed to verify that the cast object is valid has a non-negligible CPU cost.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  Note that the RunTime Type Information (RTTI) check needed to verify that the cast object is valid has a non-negligible CPU cost.
```

  Not checking the return value might lead to remote denial of service by `nullptr`-dereference, as happened with the issue described in this advisory: [2017-08: Crafted CNAME answer can cause a denial of service](https://docs.powerdns.com/recursor/security-advisories/powerdns-advisory-2017-08.html) ;
* `static_cast` can perform downcast in place of `dynamic_cast`, with none of the cost associated to the check, but can only be done if the cast is known to be valid.
  It can also do implicit conversion between types (from `ssize_t` to `size_t`, **after** checking that the value is greater or equal to zero) ;
* `reinterpret_cast` is quite dangerous, since it can be used to turn a type into a different one.
  It cannot be be used to remove a `const` qualifier.
  When used to reinterpret the content of a buffer it can quickly lead to alignment issues, as described in the [Alignment Issues] section.

> ## `errno`

Reviewer 4: The `errno` block should probably be moved to after  the TOCTU section
